Add docs on Buffered Writes (Preview) (#19601)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/v25.2/architecture/transaction-layer.md

Additionally, when other transactions encounter a transaction in `STAGING` state, they check whether the staging transaction is still in progress by verifying that the transaction coordinator is still heartbeating that staging transaction's record. If the coordinator is still heartbeating the record, the other transactions will wait, on the theory that letting the coordinator update the transaction record with the result of the attempt to commit will be faster than going through the transaction status recovery process. This means that in practice, the transaction status recovery process is only used if the transaction coordinator dies due to an untimely crash.

### Buffered writes

{% include feature-phases/preview.md %}

> {% include_cached new-in.html version="v25.2" %} Buffered writes enhance transaction throughput and reduce operational cost by minimizing the number of round trips between the gateway node and other nodes during write operations.

Reviewer: One thing I forgot to mention is that it's not clear whether buffered writes are something you enable, or the new way that CRDB works. It's not until most of the way through this section that you see it's something you enable. It might be worth clarifying that briefly here. "Buffered writes are a new, optional feature that temporarily stores..." or something like that.

Reviewer: Alternatively, move lines 451-459 to line 443.

Buffered writes work by temporarily storing a transaction's writes on the [gateway node]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/sql-layer.md %}#gateway-node) until the transaction [commits]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/commit.md %}). This approach reduces redundant writes, minimizes [pipeline](#transaction-pipelining) stalls, and allows the system to serve [read-your-writes](https://jepsen.io/consistency/models/read-your-writes) locally. Most importantly, it allows for passive use of the [1-phase commit (1PC) fast-path]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-distributed-dashboard.md %}#kv-transactions) which can lead to increased performance.

Buffered writes update the transaction flow so that it has the following properties:

1. Write buffering: Instead of sending each write operation immediately to the [leaseholder]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/overview.md %}#architecture-leaseholder), writes are now buffered on the gateway node until the transaction commits. The writes can then be issued in a single batch, reducing the number of total requests required to complete the transaction.

> 1. Local read-your-writes: During the transaction, any read operation that targets a key with a buffered write can be served directly from the buffer, avoiding [pipeline](#transaction-pipelining) stalls and reducing latency.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Local read-your-writes: During the transaction, any read operation that targets a key with a buffered write is served from the buffer, avoiding [pipeline](#transaction-pipelining) stalls and reducing latency.
```

Author: ✅

> 1. Write batching: At commit time, buffered writes are batched and sent to the [storage layer]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/storage-layer.md %}), reducing the frequency of write operations and improving throughput.

Reviewer 2: I think you could remove this point given the rewrite of the first point.

Author: removed!

Additionally, when other transactions encounter a transaction in `STAGING` state, they check whether the staging transaction is still in progress by verifying that the transaction coordinator is still heartbeating that staging transaction's record. If the coordinator is still heartbeating the record, the other transactions will wait, on the theory that letting the coordinator update the transaction record with the result of the attempt to commit will be faster than going through the transaction status recovery process. This means that in practice, the transaction status recovery process is only used if the transaction coordinator dies due to an untimely crash.

### Buffered writes

> {% include_cached new-in.html version="v25.2" %} Buffered Writes enhance transaction throughput and reduce operational cost by minimizing the number of round-trips between the gateway node and other nodes during write operations.

Author: probably not, i think 'Buffered writes' is good at beginning of sentence 

also removed the hyphen!

> {% include feature-phases/preview.md %}

Author: done!

> Buffered Writes work by temporarily storing a transaction's writes on the [gateway node]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/sql-layer.md %}#gateway-node) until the transaction [commits](#parallel-commits). This approach reduces redundant writes, minimizes [pipeline](#transaction-pipelining) stalls, and allows the system to serve read-your-writes locally. Most importantly, it allows for passive use of the [1-phase commit (1PC) fast-path]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-distributed-dashboard.md %}#kv-transactions) which can lead to increased performance.

Author: no good reason, i've updated to link to the COMMIT docs

good idea re: link, i've linked to a nice definition in the jepsen docs: https://jepsen.io/consistency/models/read-your-writes

1. Write batching: At commit time, buffered writes are batched and sent to the [storage layer]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/storage-layer.md %}), reducing the frequency of write operations and improving throughput.
1. 1-phase commit optimization (1PC): If all writes in the buffer target the same [range]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/overview.md %}#architecture-range), the system can utilize the [1-phase commit fast path]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-distributed-dashboard.md %}#kv-transactions), further optimizing the commit process. Explicit transactions that formerly were not eligible for 1PC may become eligible because their writes have been buffered.
1. Redundant write elimination: Within a single transaction, in many cases only the final write operation for each key is sent to the [Storage layer]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/storage-layer.md %}) at commit time, eliminating redundant operations.

> Buffered Writes are off by default. They can be enabled using either a [session setting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/session-variables.md %}) or a [cluster setting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}).

Reviewer: Feels like the cluster setting should also be demonstrated below?

Author: ah you're right thanks, that was an artifact of an earlier edit. @stevendanna wasn't sure about having the cluster setting in the doc, so i removed the example but forgot to update this line

updated to 

> Buffered writes are off by default. To turn them on for the current session, issue the following statement:

(PS also updated this and other mentions of "Buffered Writes" to "Buffered writes")

To turn them on for the current session, issue the following statement:

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
SET kv.transaction.buffered_writes.enabled = true
~~~

{{site.data.alerts.callout_info}}

> Buffered Writes has the following limitations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Buffered Writes have the following limitations:
```

Reviewer: Should this list be in a known limitations include and added to the Known Limitations page?

Author: updated to "have"!

i don't think they warrant it yet, this is still a preview feature, i'd hate to encode too much about it in the docs yet since it's gonna change more before GA

if you feel strongly about it tho pls let me know!

- Users of [`READ COMMITTED`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/read-committed.md %}) isolation won't see a performance benefit. This limitation is likely to remain in place until the feature is [Generally Available (GA)]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cockroachdb-feature-availability.md %}#feature-availability-phases).

> - Some workloads could see an increase in [transaction retries]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/transactions.md %}#transaction-retries).

Reviewer: Is it possible to indicate whether these are automatic or client-side or both?

Author: updated to clarify they are transaction retry errors (not auto-handled AFAICT), and linked to the txn retry error page 

@stevendanna pls correct me if wrong, and this does include auto-retries - my sense was no!

Reviewer 2: I think it includes both.

Additionally, when other transactions encounter a transaction in `STAGING` state, they check whether the staging transaction is still in progress by verifying that the transaction coordinator is still heartbeating that staging transaction's record. If the coordinator is still heartbeating the record, the other transactions will wait, on the theory that letting the coordinator update the transaction record with the result of the attempt to commit will be faster than going through the transaction status recovery process. This means that in practice, the transaction status recovery process is only used if the transaction coordinator dies due to an untimely crash.

### Buffered writes

> {% include_cached new-in.html version="v25.2" %} Buffered Writes enhance transaction throughput and reduce operational cost by minimizing the number of round-trips between the client and the database during write operations.

Reviewer 2: `client` here might be a bit of a misnomer. You might say "between the gateway node and other nodes during..." or "between the transaction coordinator and other nodes during..."

I note now we use client-side below as well. Perhaps that makes sense in the context of this document, I haven't read through the larger document in a while.

Author: makes sense - i updated to say between gateway node and others

i think the other use(s) of 'client' in this new section can also be updated, generally we use the term gateway node in the architecture docs

{% include feature-phases/preview.md %}

> Buffered Writes work by temporarily storing a transaction's writes on the client-side ([gateway node]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/sql-layer.md %}#gateway-node)) until the transaction [commits](#parallel-commits). This approach reduces redundant writes, minimizes [pipeline](#transaction-pipelining) stalls, and allows for passive use of the [1-phase commit (1PC) fast-path]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-distributed-dashboard.md %}#kv-transactions). By deferring writes until commit time, the system can serve read-your-writes locally, resulting in further potential performance gains.

Reviewer 2: I think ending with write-your-writes locally maybe gives it too much prominence. For most users, the ability to potentially get 1PC for explicit transactions is likely the biggest win.

Author: revised to move read-your-writes earlier in the list, and end with 1PC & call out its potential performance gains explicitly:

> Buffered Writes work by temporarily storing a transaction's writes on the [gateway node]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/sql-layer.md %}#gateway-node) until the transaction [commits](#parallel-commits). This approach reduces redundant writes, minimizes [pipeline](#transaction-pipelining) stalls, and allows the system to serve read-your-writes locally. Most importantly, it allows for passive use of the [1-phase commit (1PC) fast-path]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-distributed-dashboard.md %}#kv-transactions) which can lead to increased performance.

Buffered Writes update the transaction flow so that it has the following properties:

> 1. Write buffering: Instead of sending each write operation immediately to the [leaseholder]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/overview.md %}#architecture-leaseholder), writes are buffered on the client-side until the transaction commits. This reduces the number of write operations sent to the [Distribution layer]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/distribution-layer.md %}).

Reviewer 2: For many transactions, the impact of this buffering is not to reduce the number of write operations but to issue that same number of write operations in a single batch rather than multiple batches. This is what the write batching bit gets at below so perhaps you could combine this point and the other point. Maybe something like:

> 1. Write buffering: Instead of sending each write operation immediate to the leaseholder, writes are now buffered on the client-side until the transaction commits. The writes can then be issued in a single batch, reducing the number of total requests required to complete the transaction.

Author: updated to use your text with  "client-side" changed to "gateway node "

1. Local read-your-writes: During the transaction, any read operation that targets a key with a buffered write can be served directly from the buffer, avoiding [pipeline](#transaction-pipelining) stalls and reducing latency.
1. Write batching: At commit time, buffered writes are batched and sent to the [storage layer]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/storage-layer.md %}), reducing the frequency of write operations and improving throughput.

> 1. 1-phase commit optimization (1PC): If all writes in the buffer target the same [range]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/overview.md %}#architecture-range), the system can utilize the [1-phase commit fast path]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/ui-distributed-dashboard.md %}#kv-transactions), further optimizing the commit process.

Reviewer 2: An important point here is that explicit transactions that would not be eligible for 1PC may become eligible because their writes have been buffered.

> 1. Redundant write elimination: Within a single transaction, only the final write operation for each key is sent to the [Storage layer]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/storage-layer.md %}) at commit time, eliminating redundant operations.

Reviewer 2: Unfortunately, very soon there will be an exception to this:
```suggestion
1. Redundant write elimination: Within a single transaction, in many cases only the final write operation for each key is sent to the [Storage layer]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/architecture/storage-layer.md %}) at commit time, eliminating redundant operations.
```

Author: updated! (I did this locally, not with the UI so all the changes from this convo are in 1 commit)

Buffered Writes are off by default. They can be enabled using either a [session setting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/session-variables.md %}) or a [cluster setting]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings.md %}).

To turn them on for the current session, issue the following statement:

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
SET kv.transaction.buffered_writes.enabled = true
~~~

To turn them on for the entire cluster, issue the following statement:

{% include_cached copy-clipboard.html %}
~~~ sql
SET CLUSTER SETTING kv.transaction.buffered_writes.enabled = true;

> ~~~

Reviewer 2: I kinda wonder if we want to advertise this for the preview.

Author: makes sense, folks could set it and forget it and then need help when something goes wrong and they forgot they did this 

since you flagged it, i've removed the cluster setting from the doc (and left the session setting), interested parties who know where to look can go find it, and our internal folks will know how to do it for prospects doing POCs etc anyway
